README.md, before:

# Rust Development Guidelines at the Laboratory for Web Algorithmics

This file details the guidelines for developing Rust code at the Laboratory for
Web Algorithmics. It is a document _in fieri_, and will be updated as
necessary.

These guidelines extend the [Rust API
Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/about.html).

## Tools

- Code should be `cargo clippy --all-features --all-targets`-clean.

- Use `rustfmt` with standard options to format the code. Formatting should
  be enabled as a save action in the editor to reduce the number of spurious
  difference in commits due to spacing and formatting.

- To release new versions:
  - run `cargo c --all-targets --all-features`;
  - run `cargo +nightly fuzz build` if necessary;
  - run `cargo doc --all-features --document-private-items` and check the generated docs;
  - run `cargo deadlinks`;
  - run `cargo t --all-features --all-targets`, which will include the `slow_tests` feature,
    if available;
  - bump the version number;
  - run [`cargo semver-checks`](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-semver-checks);
  - update the change log;
  - commit the changes;
  - publish the crate (in case of a crate with procedural macros,
    first publish the procedural macros, then test again the main
    crate, and finally publish the main crate);
  - create an annotated tag for the new release with `git tag -m"Release VERSION" VERSION`;
  - add on GitHub a new titleless release associated with the newly created tag,
    and a message given by the entry of the change log.

## Naming Conventions

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0344-conventions-galore.md>

- As in the Rust standard libraries, traits should use the indefinite/imperative
  form of a verb, whereas implementing structures should use a qualified agent
  associated with the verb: for example, the trait `Read` is implemented by
  `BufReader`. See “Trait Naming” in the link above.

- Modules are directories containing a `mod.rs` file. They should have plural
  names for countables, as in `traits`, `impls`, `utils`, `tests`, and singular
  names for uncountables, such as `fuzz`. Module names should be (very) short.

- Modules that contain a single trait or structure should not be public, and
  the trait or structure should be re-exported by the module that contains it.
  Otherwise, the module should be public and should contain documentation about
  its content.

## Structure of Source Files

In source files, information about types should appear in this order:

- declaration;
- implementations of derivable traits;
- macros (constructors, etc.);
- inherent implementations;
- implementations of traits from the crate;
- implementations of external crates;
- implementations of traits from the standard library.

## Structures

- In structures, the first declared fields should be the immutable ones (e.g.,
those that do not change value in the lifetime of the structure) followed by the
mutable ones. In each section, fields should be ordered from the most
general/important to the least general/important. In particular, chains of
dependence should be reflected by the field order.

- `impl` blocks should minimize the trait bounds of the type parameters. This is
  a concern similar to
  [C-STRUCT-BOUNDS](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/future-proofing.html#c-struct-bounds).
  For example,

  ```rust
  impl<S: Read + Seek> Foo<S> {
      pub fn bar(seek: S) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
          seek.stream_position()
      }
  }
  ```

  should be

  ```rust
  impl<S: Seek> Foo<S> {
      pub fn bar(seek: S) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
          seek.stream_position()
      }
  }

## Traits

- Always implement `ExactSizeIterator`/`ExactSizeLender` and
  `FusedIterator`/`FusedLender` when possible

## Methods

- Rust does not allow for optional parameters with default values, but often one
simulates them implicitly using `Option` or special values. In functions and
methods, the first parameters should be the compulsory ones, followed
by the optional ones. In each section, arguments should be ordered from the most
general/important to the least general/important. In particular, chains of
dependence should be reflected by the argument order.

- Prefer `impl Trait` over type parameters whenever possible.
  For example,

  ```rust
  pub fn doit<P: AsRef<Path>>(a: P) {

  }
  ```

  is better written as

  ```rust
  pub fn doit(a: impl AsRef<Path>) {

  }
  ```

  Possible reasons for using type parameters instead of `impl Trait` include:
  - the type parameter is used in the return type of the function or method;
  - the type parameter is used in the body of the function or method.

- Type parameters and `impl Trait` parameters should minimize trait bounds. This
  is a concern similar to
  [C-STRUCT-BOUNDS](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/future-proofing.html#c-struct-bounds).
  For example,

  ```rust
  pub fn bar(seek: impl (Read + Seek)) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
      seek.stream_position()
  }
  ```

  should be

  ```rust
  pub fn bar(seek: impl Seek) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
      seek.stream_position()
  }

- There are a few standard preferences in argument types:
  - always prefer receiving an `IntoIterator` rather than an `Iterator`;
  - always prefer receiving a `AsRef<str>` rather than a `String`, `&str`, or
      `&String`;
  - always prefer receiving a `AsRef<Path>` rather than a `Path`, `&Path`, or
      `&PathBuf`;
  - always prefer receiving a reference to a slice rather than a more specific
    data structure like a vector.

## Tests

- Test functions should be named `test_` followed by a brief description of the
  feature tested, e.g., `test_long_input`. If a source file contains tests for
  more than one structure, the test functions might sport a disambiguating
  suffix after `test_`—for example, the name of the structure.

- Test functions must return `anyhow::Result<()>` and use the `?` operator,
  avoiding `unwrap` and `expect` unless absolutely necessary.

- Assertions in tests must sport first the actual value, and then the expected
  value. For example,

  ```rust
  assert_eq!(bit_read.read_gamma(), 2);
  ```

- Unit tests that need to access the private parts of a structure should be
  added directly at the end of the source file as

  ```rust
  #[cfg(test)]
  mod tests {
      use super::*;

      #[test]
      fn test_long_input() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
      }
  }
  ```

- Unit-test functions should be named `test_` followed by a brief description of
  the tested structure, or the specific feature tested.

- Longer, end-to-end, and possibly slow tests should be placed in a separate
  file named `test_*` in the `tests` directory.

- Very slow tests should be gated with the feature `slow_tests`. Ideally, `cargo
  test` should not take more than a few seconds to run.

## Macros

- In macros, one should always specify structures and traits starting from `::`
  to avoid relative resolution. This does not fix the problem of crates
  shadowing modules in the standard library, but if that happens there are much
  bigger problems to attend to. The most readable approach is adding a `use
  ::...` statement at the beginning each method body. Then, you can just use the
  name of the structure or trait.

- Note that in declarative macros you can use `$crate::` to refer to items in
  the current crate.

- Trait methods in macros and generated code should use the [fully qualified
  syntax](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch20-02-advanced-traits.html) rather
  than the dot syntax, to avoid unpredictable method-resolution issues. Inherent
  methods can use the dot syntax.

## Logging

- All binaries and tests using logging (e.g., a `ProgressLogger`) must configure
  an `env_logger` with

  ```rust
      env_logger::builder()
          .filter_level(log::LevelFilter::Info)
          .try_init()?;
  ```

  or

  ```rust
      env_logger::builder()
          .is_test(true)
          .filter_level(log::LevelFilter::Info)
          .try_init()?;
  ```

  for tests.

## Errors

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0236-error-conventions.md>

## Documentation

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1574-more-api-documentation-conventions.md>

- An additional documentation section `Implementation Notes` can be used to
  gather details of the implementation that are not relevant to the user.

- Functions and methods should be documented [in this
  way](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/meta/doc.html).

- Function arguments need not be documented explicitly if the meaning is
  evident from the naming; otherwise, they should be documented as follows:

  ```rust
  /// # Arguments
  ///
  /// * `a` - The first argument, and note that lines should be max 80 characters
  /// long to facilitate reading.
  ///
  /// * `b` - The second argument. Note the empty line above.
  ///
  /// * `c` - The third argument. Note the empty line below.
  ```

- As discussed in the reference above, links should be written in reference
  style, and the references should be placed at the end of the documentation
  block.

- The main crate documentation must be placed in a `README.md` file that
  is included by `lib.rs` using `#![doc = include_str!("../README.md")]`.
  All links in the `README.md` file should be written in reference style, using
  absolute URLs, possibly pointing to the latest version of the crate on
  `docs.rs` for the crate, as in

  ```md
  [`MemCase`]: <https://docs.rs/epserde/latest/epserde/deser/mem_case/struct.MemCase.html>
  ```

- Each project should sport a change log named `CHANGELOG.md` with the
  following sample format:

  ```md
  # Change Log

  ## [0.0.1] - 1970-01-02

  ### New

  * New feature, and note that lines should be max 80 characters long to
    facilitate reading.

  * Other new feature.

  ### Changed

  * Something changed (not new, not an improvement, not a fix).

  ### Improved

  * Improvement.

  ### Fixed

  * Bug fix.


  ## [0.0.0] - 1970-01-01

  ### New

  * New feature.

  ### Changed

  * Something changed (not new, not an improvement, not a fix).

  ### Improved

  * Improvement.

  ### Fixed

  * Bug fix.

```

Commit message:

Update README with CLI commands guidelines
Add CLI commands guidelines reference to README

README.md, after:

# Rust Development Guidelines at the Laboratory for Web Algorithmics

This file details the guidelines for developing Rust code at the Laboratory for
Web Algorithmics. It is a document _in fieri_, and will be updated as
necessary.

These guidelines extend the [Rust API
Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/about.html).

For CLI commands, follow the [Command-Line Interface Guidelines](https://clig.dev/).

## Tools

- Code should be `cargo clippy --all-features --all-targets`-clean.

- Use `rustfmt` with standard options to format the code. Formatting should
  be enabled as a save action in the editor to reduce the number of spurious
  difference in commits due to spacing and formatting.

- To release new versions:
  - run `cargo c --all-targets --all-features`;
  - run `cargo +nightly fuzz build` if necessary;
  - run `cargo doc --all-features --document-private-items` and check the generated docs;
  - run `cargo deadlinks`;
  - run `cargo t --all-features --all-targets`, which will include the `slow_tests` feature,
    if available;
  - bump the version number;
  - run [`cargo semver-checks`](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-semver-checks);
  - update the change log;
  - commit the changes;
  - publish the crate (in case of a crate with procedural macros,
    first publish the procedural macros, then test again the main
    crate, and finally publish the main crate);
  - create an annotated tag for the new release with `git tag -m"Release VERSION" VERSION`;
  - add on GitHub a new titleless release associated with the newly created tag,
    and a message given by the entry of the change log.

## Naming Conventions

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0344-conventions-galore.md>

- As in the Rust standard libraries, traits should use the indefinite/imperative
  form of a verb, whereas implementing structures should use a qualified agent
  associated with the verb: for example, the trait `Read` is implemented by
  `BufReader`. See “Trait Naming” in the link above.

- Modules are directories containing a `mod.rs` file. They should have plural
  names for countables, as in `traits`, `impls`, `utils`, `tests`, and singular
  names for uncountables, such as `fuzz`. Module names should be (very) short.

- Modules that contain a single trait or structure should not be public, and
  the trait or structure should be re-exported by the module that contains it.
  Otherwise, the module should be public and should contain documentation about
  its content.

## Structure of Source Files

In source files, information about types should appear in this order:

- declaration;
- implementations of derivable traits;
- macros (constructors, etc.);
- inherent implementations;
- implementations of traits from the crate;
- implementations of external crates;
- implementations of traits from the standard library.

## Structures

- In structures, the first declared fields should be the immutable ones (e.g.,
those that do not change value in the lifetime of the structure) followed by the
mutable ones. In each section, fields should be ordered from the most
general/important to the least general/important. In particular, chains of
dependence should be reflected by the field order.

- `impl` blocks should minimize the trait bounds of the type parameters. This is
  a concern similar to
  [C-STRUCT-BOUNDS](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/future-proofing.html#c-struct-bounds).
  For example,

  ```rust
  impl<S: Read + Seek> Foo<S> {
      pub fn bar(seek: S) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
          seek.stream_position()
      }
  }
  ```

  should be

  ```rust
  impl<S: Seek> Foo<S> {
      pub fn bar(seek: S) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
          seek.stream_position()
      }
  }

## Traits

- Always implement `ExactSizeIterator`/`ExactSizeLender` and
  `FusedIterator`/`FusedLender` when possible

## Methods

- Rust does not allow for optional parameters with default values, but often one
simulates them implicitly using `Option` or special values. In functions and
methods, the first parameters should be the compulsory ones, followed
by the optional ones. In each section, arguments should be ordered from the most
general/important to the least general/important. In particular, chains of
dependence should be reflected by the argument order.

- Prefer `impl Trait` over type parameters whenever possible.
  For example,

  ```rust
  pub fn doit<P: AsRef<Path>>(a: P) {

  }
  ```

  is better written as

  ```rust
  pub fn doit(a: impl AsRef<Path>) {

  }
  ```

  Possible reasons for using type parameters instead of `impl Trait` include:
  - the type parameter is used in the return type of the function or method;
  - the type parameter is used in the body of the function or method.

- Type parameters and `impl Trait` parameters should minimize trait bounds. This
  is a concern similar to
  [C-STRUCT-BOUNDS](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/future-proofing.html#c-struct-bounds).
  For example,

  ```rust
  pub fn bar(seek: impl (Read + Seek)) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
      seek.stream_position()
  }
  ```

  should be

  ```rust
  pub fn bar(seek: impl Seek) -> std::io::Result<u64> {
      seek.stream_position()
  }

- There are a few standard preferences in argument types:
  - always prefer receiving an `IntoIterator` rather than an `Iterator`;
  - always prefer receiving a `AsRef<str>` rather than a `String`, `&str`, or
      `&String`;
  - always prefer receiving a `AsRef<Path>` rather than a `Path`, `&Path`, or
      `&PathBuf`;
  - always prefer receiving a reference to a slice rather than a more specific
    data structure like a vector.

## Tests

- Test functions should be named `test_` followed by a brief description of the
  feature tested, e.g., `test_long_input`. If a source file contains tests for
  more than one structure, the test functions might sport a disambiguating
  suffix after `test_`—for example, the name of the structure.

- Test functions must return `anyhow::Result<()>` and use the `?` operator,
  avoiding `unwrap` and `expect` unless absolutely necessary.

- Assertions in tests must sport first the actual value, and then the expected
  value. For example,

  ```rust
  assert_eq!(bit_read.read_gamma(), 2);
  ```

- Unit tests that need to access the private parts of a structure should be
  added directly at the end of the source file as

  ```rust
  #[cfg(test)]
  mod tests {
      use super::*;

      #[test]
      fn test_long_input() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
      }
  }
  ```

- Unit-test functions should be named `test_` followed by a brief description of
  the tested structure, or the specific feature tested.

- Longer, end-to-end, and possibly slow tests should be placed in a separate
  file named `test_*` in the `tests` directory.

- Very slow tests should be gated with the feature `slow_tests`. Ideally, `cargo
  test` should not take more than a few seconds to run.

## Macros

- In macros, one should always specify structures and traits starting from `::`
  to avoid relative resolution. This does not fix the problem of crates
  shadowing modules in the standard library, but if that happens there are much
  bigger problems to attend to. The most readable approach is adding a `use
  ::...` statement at the beginning each method body. Then, you can just use the
  name of the structure or trait.

- Note that in declarative macros you can use `$crate::` to refer to items in
  the current crate.

- Trait methods in macros and generated code should use the [fully qualified
  syntax](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch20-02-advanced-traits.html) rather
  than the dot syntax, to avoid unpredictable method-resolution issues. Inherent
  methods can use the dot syntax.

## Logging

- All binaries and tests using logging (e.g., a `ProgressLogger`) must configure
  an `env_logger` with

  ```rust
      env_logger::builder()
          .filter_level(log::LevelFilter::Info)
          .try_init()?;
  ```

  or

  ```rust
      env_logger::builder()
          .is_test(true)
          .filter_level(log::LevelFilter::Info)
          .try_init()?;
  ```

  for tests.

## Errors

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0236-error-conventions.md>

## Documentation

- <https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1574-more-api-documentation-conventions.md>

- An additional documentation section `Implementation Notes` can be used to
  gather details of the implementation that are not relevant to the user.

- Functions and methods should be documented [in this
  way](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/meta/doc.html).

- Function arguments need not be documented explicitly if the meaning is
  evident from the naming; otherwise, they should be documented as follows:

  ```rust
  /// # Arguments
  ///
  /// * `a` - The first argument, and note that lines should be max 80 characters
  /// long to facilitate reading.
  ///
  /// * `b` - The second argument. Note the empty line above.
  ///
  /// * `c` - The third argument. Note the empty line below.
  ```

- As discussed in the reference above, links should be written in reference
  style, and the references should be placed at the end of the documentation
  block.

- The main crate documentation must be placed in a `README.md` file that
  is included by `lib.rs` using `#![doc = include_str!("../README.md")]`.
  All links in the `README.md` file should be written in reference style, using
  absolute URLs, possibly pointing to the latest version of the crate on
  `docs.rs` for the crate, as in

  ```md
  [`MemCase`]: <https://docs.rs/epserde/latest/epserde/deser/mem_case/struct.MemCase.html>
  ```

- Each project should sport a change log named `CHANGELOG.md` with the
  following sample format:

  ```md
  # Change Log

  ## [0.0.1] - 1970-01-02

  ### New

  * New feature, and note that lines should be max 80 characters long to
    facilitate reading.

  * Other new feature.

  ### Changed

  * Something changed (not new, not an improvement, not a fix).

  ### Improved

  * Improvement.

  ### Fixed

  * Bug fix.


  ## [0.0.0] - 1970-01-01

  ### New

  * New feature.

  ### Changed

  * Something changed (not new, not an improvement, not a fix).

  ### Improved

  * Improvement.

  ### Fixed

  * Bug fix.

```
